---
title: "Why youth hackathons?"
number: "2.2"
---
        
Hackathons are a format created in software development circles that often involves the development of workable prototypes within a clearly defined timeframe to work within teams to solve a specific issue or problem. A more detailed definition of the Hackathon can be found in Chapter 2.5. Hackathons offer exciting access to political youth education on several levels. In the context of the thematic orientation of hackathons, for example, reference can be made to the living conditions of young people. At the same time, the technical solution to these questions provides an experience of self-efficacy, according to the principle: "I can actually deal with real problems with my technical abilities." There is thus a positive approach to technology that serves not only the self-interest of pure technical understanding. Added to this is the collaborative aspect of hackathons. The only way to get really satisfying solutions is to work together with others, but not only that: In "Jugend hackt", we were able to observe the enthusiasm of young technology lovers to finally be able to pursue their interest. This kind of networking is often not possible in their everyday life. A youth hackathon thus offers them the opportunity to pursue their technical curiosity and to develop new abilities with the help of mentors (see chapter 3.2). They can also exchange ideas with likeminded people along themes and questions which they themselves determine and which are directly related to their lives. In the end, for example, projects such as "Awearness" at "Jugend hackt" 2014 in Berlin are created: Awearness is a self-designed, 3D-printed bracelet, which vibrates when it comes close to a surveillance camera. The project group wanted to make the abstract topic of digital monitoring tangible and concrete.